# How to:

## Setup Zero Tier in VPS


Here's a step-by-step guide on how to set up a self-hosted ZeroTier network on an Ubuntu 
server:
1. Sign up for a VPS service and create a new virtual machine running Ubuntu.
2. Connect to your new virtual machine via SSH.
3. Install the ZeroTier One package by running the following command:

```shell
curl -s https://install.zerotier.com | bash
```
4. Start the ZeroTier service by running:
```shell
systemctl start zerotier-one
```
5. Create a new network on the ZeroTier Central web UI. To do this, open a web browser and navigate to  ```https://<the IP of your VPS>:9993``` You will be prompted to log in with the credentials you set up when you first installed the package.

6. Once you are logged in, click on "Networks" in the top menu, then click on "Create a new network." Fill in the network name and network ID, and click "Create."

7. Take note of the network ID. This is the ID that you will use to join devices to your network.

8. Install the ZeroTier One package on any devices that you want to connect to your network.

9. Join the devices to the network by running the command:
```shell
zerotier-cli join <network ID>
```
10. Configure your firewall and routing to allow traffic to and from the ZeroTier virtual network interface.

#### How to connect from Another server
1. On Server B, install ZeroTier One by downloading the appropriate installer for Ubuntu from the ZeroTier website: https://www.zerotier.com/download.shtml and follow the instructions provided.

2. Once the software is installed, launch the ZeroTier One service on Server B by running the command
```shell
sudo systemctl start zerotier-one
```
3. On Server B, join the network by running the command
```shell
sudo zerotier-cli join [network_id]
```
4. On Server B, authorize the network by running the command
```shell
sudo zerotier-cli set [network_id] allowDefault=1
```
5. On both servers, check the status of the network by running the command
```shell
sudo zerotier-cli info
```
```shell
sudo zerotier-cli listpeers
```
6. Finally, you may need to configure your firewall rules to allow traffic to and from the other server, depending on your network configuration.

#### Configure firewalls both servers
1. On Server A, check the current ufw status by running the command
```shell
sudo ufw status
```
2. On Server A, allow traffic on `port 9993`, the default port used by ZeroTier, by running the command
```shell
sudo ufw allow 9993/udp
```
3. On Server A, enable the firewall by running the command
```shell
sudo ufw enable
```
4. Repeat the above steps on Server B, allowing traffic on port 9993 and enabling the firewall.

:::note
After enabling ufw, SSH port 22 will be disconnected so to prevent follow the steps bellow:
1. Allow incoming SSH traffic on the default SSH port (22) by running the command
```shell
sudo ufw allow ssh
```
2. Check the status of the firewall by running the command
```shell
sudo ufw status 
```
3. Enable the firewall by running the command
```shell
sudo ufw enable
```
:::