---
sidebar_position: 3
---
# System Administration

## Sed command
- Replace a string in a file with a newstring  ``sed -i 's/James/Josena/g' testfile.txt ``
- FInd and delete a aline ``sed -i '1d' testfile.txt ``
- remove empty lines
- Remove first or line in  a file
- To replace tabs with spaces ``sed -i 's/\t/ /g' testfile.txt ``
- Show defined lines from a file ``sed -n 2,3p testfile.txt ``
- substitute within vi editor


## Password expiray managment
 
 To modify default password setup edit file `/etc/login.defs`

 ## Users Mangement
** commands to switch users **
- `su` = root switch to root (``sudo su``)and change to other user( ``su – [other_user]``)
- `sudo` = give admin previledges 
- `visudo` = edits sudo file to set certain previledges.

** Monitor Users **
- `who `- shows session history
- `w `- user session monitor
- `finger` -gives you full information user login
- `Id` - findes users and groups by names and ids

## Communicating with users
- `users` - Show current users logged in the system
- `wall` - Broadcast to all users
- `Write [user]` - Private message to specific user

## Account authentication
- Active directories
- Identity manager
- WindBIND
- OpenLAP
- IMB Directories 
- LDAP
## System Utility Command
- `date` - command show date
- `uptime` - show computer load average
- `hostname` - shows computer name
- `uname` - shows operating system type
- `which` - shows location of commands
- `cal` - shows calender
- `bc`- Binary calculator

## Processes and Jobs
- `Application `=> Services - Software running
- `Script` - commands writen in a file that excutes
- `Processes` - any active (running) instance of a program
- `Daemon` - is a program that runs in the background without requiring any user interaction
- `Threads` - is a small set of instructions designed to be scheduled and executed by the CPU independently of the parent process.
- `Jobs ` - a job is the unit of work that a computer operator (or a program called a job scheduler) gives to the operating system.

## control commands

#### Systemctl command
`sytemctl command` is a new tool to control system services. It available linux 7 and later and repalce the service command.
```shell title="Status services"
systemctl status sshd.service
```
```shell title="List of service by status"
systemctl list-units --type=service --state=active
```
#### ps command
`ps command` is used to list the currently running processes and their PIDs along with some other information depends on different options.
```shell title="Show all running processes"
ps -e
```
```shell title="show all running processes in BSD format"
ps aux
```
```shell title="show all running processes in full format listing"
ps -ef
```
```shell title="show all running processes by username"
ps -u root
```

#### top command
top command is used to show the Linux processes. It provides a dynamic real-time view of the running system. Usually, this command shows the summary information of the system and the list of processes or threads which are currently managed by the Linux Kernel.
```shell
top
```
```shell title="show all running processes by username"
top -u root
```
```shell title="show absolute path processes"
top then c
```
```shell title="kill process"
top then k
```
```shell title="sort processes"
top then p then M
```


#### kill command
Kill is used to terminate processes manually

```shell title='Syntex kill command'
kill [option] [PID]
```
- `kill PID` kills process with default signal
- `kill -1` restarts
- `kill -2` Interupts like ctl + c
- `kill -9` Kills forcefully
- `kill -15` kills gracefully

#### crontab command
The crontab command submits, edits, lists, or removes cron jobs. A cron job is a command run by the cron daemon at regularly scheduled intervals.

- `crontab -e` - The crontab
- `crontab -i` - Lists all crontab entries
-  `crontab -r` - Remove the crontab
- `crond` - crontab daemon/services that manages scheduling 

```shell title="crontab -e"
36 6 * * * echo "This is the automated file from crond" > /home/mjama/testfile2
```
#### at commmand
at command is like crontab which allows you to scheduale jobs but only once.

when the command is run it will enter interactive mode and you can get out by pressing `Ctrl D`

Usage: 
- `at HH:MM AM` - Scheduale a job
- `atq`         - List the at entries
- `atrm #`      - at daemon/service that manages scheduling
- `systemctl status atd` - To manage the atd service

```shell 
at 00:00AM  Enter ⏎ commmand 
```


#### Additional cronjobs

By default there are 4 different types of cronjobs
- Hourly 
- Daily
- Weekly
- Monthly

All the above crons are setup in `/etc/cron`

The timing for each are set in `/etc/anacrontab` -- except hourly

For hourly are set in `/etc/cron.d/0hourly.`

## Process Management
- Background - Ctrl-z, Jobs and bg
- Foreground - fg
- Run process even after exit - nohup process &  OR nohub process > /dev/null 2>&1 &
- Kill a process by name - pkill
- process priority - nice (e.g. nice -n 5 process)








