# Oracle Architecture

#### Two main components of Oracle database
- Database instance 
- Database storage

## Database Instance

#### Components of Oracle DB Instance
 - System Global Area (SGA)
 - Program Global Area (PGA)
 - background processes

 **System Global Area (SGA)** - A shared memory area that contains `data buffers` and control information for the instance.The main components of the SGA include the database `buffer cache`, `shared pool`, and `redo log buffers`. The database `buffer cache` contains actual copies of data blocks from the database. When you update a table, the information is first modified in the data buffer and is later written to disk. The shared pool has `library cache`, which stores parsed SQL and PL/SQL statements and `dictionary cache`, which stores the Oracle data dictionary (or Oracle metadata). The `redo log buffer `is a circular buffer in the SGA that holds information about changes made to the database. This information is stored in redo entries. Redo entries contain the information necessary to reconstruct, or redo, changes made to the database by INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, CREATE, ALTER, or DROP operations.

 **Program Global Area (PGA)** - The Program Global Area (PGA) is a non-shared, writable memory area associated with a user process. Although the mechanism varies somewhat by operating system, the PGA is typically allocated when a server process establishes a connection to the instance via the SGA.

 **background processes** - The background processes of the Oracle instance manage memory structures, asynchronously perform I/O to write data to a file on a disk, and perform general maintenance tasks. The background processes consolidate functions that would otherwise be handled by multiple Oracle Database programs running for each user process. They monitor other Oracle Database processes to provide increased parallelism for better performance and reliability.The background processes in an Oracle instance can include the following:

    - Database Writer Process (DBWn)
    - Log Writer Process (LGWR)
    - Checkpoint Process (CKPT)
    - System Monitor Process (SMON)
    - Process Monitor Process (PMON)
    - Recoverer Process (RECO)
    - Job Queue Processes
    - Archiver Processes (ARCn)
    - Queue Monitor Processes (QMNn)

## Database Storage

#### Physical storage structures

The physical storage structures are simply files that store data. When you execute a CREATE DATABASE statement to create a new database, Oracle creates the following files:

***Data files:*** data files contain real data, e.g., sales order and customer data. The data of logical database structures such as tables and indexes are physically stored in the data files.

***Control files:*** every database has a control file that contains metadata. The metadata describes the physical structure of the database including the database name and the locations of data files.

***Online redo log files:*** every database has an online redo log that consists of two or more online redo log files. An online redo log is made up of redo entries that record all changes made to the data.

Besides these files, an Oracle database includes other important files such as parameter files, network files, backup files, and archived redo log files for backup and recovery.
Oracle Database Architecture - database system files

#### Logical Storage Structures

Oracle Database uses a logical storage structure for fine-grained control of disk space usage. The following are logical storage structures in an Oracle Database:

***Data blocks:*** a data block corresponds to a number of bytes on the disk. Oracle stores data in data blocks. Data blocks are also referred to as logical blocks, Oracle blocks or pages.

***Extents:*** An extent is a specific number of logically contiguous data blocks used to store the particular type of information.

***Segments:*** a segment is a set of extents allocated for storing database objects, e.g., a table or an index.

***Tablespaces:*** a database is divided into logical storage units called tablespaces. A tablespace is a logical container for a segment. Each tablespace consists of at least one data file.



